NewGenLTU openRAIL-D license

Version 1.0

Date: 1/4/2026

Section I: PREAMBLE

This NewGenLTU Open RAIL License is generally applicable to the Artifact(s) identified below.

This Open RAIL-D license was specifically created by a team of researchers at Vytautas Magnus University for the publication of the projects’ results – datasets – that had been developed in the course of the research and development projects funded by the New Generation Lithuania plan. The New Generation Lithuania plan is funded by the Recovery and Resilience Facility (RRF). It was decided to establish this license in order to address certain limitations relating to the use of datasets and to ensure compliance with the EU AI Act, data protection requirements, and copyright law.

This license strives for open and responsible downstream use of the model and/or dataset(s) while ensuring that the works subject to copyright that are contained in the dataset will not be used to recreate the works but rather will be used for AI training and other technology development activities. Similarly, with the models, the license strives to ensure compliance with the EU data protection regulation thus prohibiting the recreation or extraction of personal data from the dataset requiring the model trained on the dataset to limit its ability to reproduce or extract personal data.

This license governs the use of the dataset and/or the model (and their derivatives).

Licensed Artifact(s):

* Dataset created under the New Generation Lithuania plan

NOW THEREFORE, You and Licensor agree as follows:

1. Definitions

   a. “Application” refers to a sequence of instructions or statements written in machine code language, including object code, binary code or an intermediate language.

   b. “Artifact” refers to the Dataset identified above as the “Licensed Artifact”, including its structure, content, organization, formatting, annotations, documentation, and associated metadata.

   c. “Contribution” means any work, including any modifications or additions to the Dataset, that is intentionally submitted to Licensor for inclusion or incorporation in the Dataset directly or indirectly by the rights owner.

   d. “Contributor” means Licensor or any other individual or legal entity owning a Contribution that is incorporated into the Artifact or its Derivative.

   e. “Data” means a collection of information, content, entries, metadata and/or other material contained within the Dataset. For clarity: the Data is licensed under this OpenRAIL-D license.

   f. “Derivative” means a work derived from or based upon the Artifact, including modified, cleaned, filtered, annotated, explained, or reformatted versions.

   g. “Distribution” means any transmission, reproduction, publication or other sharing of the Artifact or Derivatives to a third party, including making available by electronic or other remote means – e.g. API-based or web access.

   h. “Harm” includes but is not limited to physical, mental, psychological, financial and reputational damage, pain, or loss.

   i. “License” means the terms and conditions for use, reproduction, and Distribution as defined in this document.

   j. “Licensor” means the rights owner (by virtue of creation or documented transfer of ownership) or entity authorized by the rights owner (e.g., exclusive licensee) that is granting the rights in this License.

   k. “Model” means any machine-learning based assembly or assemblies (including checkpoints), consisting of learnt weights, parameters (including optimizer states), corresponding to the model architecture as embodied in the Source Code.

   l. “Output” means the results of operating a Model as embodied in informational content resulting therefrom.

   m. “Source Code” means any collection of text written using human-readable programming language, including the code and scripts used to define, run, load, benchmark or evaluate a Model or any component thereof, and/or used to prepare data for training or evaluation, if any. Source Code includes any accompanying documentation, tutorials, examples, etc., if any. For clarity, the term “Source Code” as used in this License includes any and all derivatives of such Source Code.

   n. “Third Parties” means individuals or legal entities that are not under common control with Licensor or You.

   o. “Use” includes accessing, analyzing, copying, transforming, training models on, evaluating, or otherwise utilizing the Dataset or any Derivative.

   p. “You” (or “Your”) means an individual or legal entity receiving and exercising permissions granted by this License and/or making use of the Artifact for permitted purposes and in any permitted field of use, including usage of the Artifact in an end-use application – e.g. chatbot, translator, image generator, etc.

Section II: INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS

Copyright applies to the Artifact. The Artifact is subject to additional terms as described in Section III below, which govern the use of the Artifact.

2. Grant of Copyright License. Conditioned upon compliance with Section III below and subject to the terms and conditions of this License, each Contributor hereby grants to You a worldwide, non-exclusive, royalty-free copyright license to access, reproduce, use, modify, annotate, publicly display and distribute the Artifact and Derivatives thereof.

Section III: CONDITIONS OF USAGE, DISTRIBUTION AND REDISTRIBUTION

3. Use-based restrictions. The restrictions set forth in Attachment A are mandatory Use-based restrictions. Therefore You may not Use the Artifact in violation of such restrictions. You may Use the Artifact only subject to this License. You shall require all of Your users who use the Artifact or its Derivative to comply with the terms of this paragraph.

4. The Output You Generate with a Model Trained on the Artifact. Licensor claims no rights in the Output You generate. You are accountable for the Output You generate and its subsequent uses. No use of the Output may contravene any provision as stated in this License.

5. Distribution and Redistribution. You may host, reproduce and distribute copies of the Artifact or its Derivatives in any medium, with or without modifications, provided that You meet the following conditions:

   a. Use-based restrictions in paragraph 3 (and in the Attachment A) MUST be included as a condition precedent to effect any type of legal agreement (e.g. a license) governing the use and/or distribution of the Artifact or its Derivatives, and You shall give such notice to any subsequent Third Party recipients;

   b. You shall give any Third Party recipients of the Artifact or its Derivatives a copy of this License;

   c. You shall cause any modified files to carry prominent notices stating that You changed the files;

   d. You shall retain all copyright, patent, trademark, and attribution notices excluding those notices that do not pertain to any part of the Artifact or its Derivatives.

   e. You may use the Artifact or its Derivatives only for Model training or other language technology development or production of datasets for Model training.

Section IV: OTHER PROVISIONS

6. Updates and Runtime Restrictions. To the maximum extent permitted by law, Licensor reserves the right to restrict or update the Artifact or revoke access to it in the event of violations of this License.

7. Trademarks and related. Nothing in this License permits You to make use of Licensors’ trademarks, trade names, logos or to otherwise suggest endorsement or misrepresent the relationship between the parties; and any rights not expressly granted herein are reserved by the Licensors.

8. Disclaimer of Warranty. Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, Licensor provides the Artifact (and each Contributor provides its Contributions) on an „AS IS“ BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied, including, without limitation, any warranties or conditions of TITLE, NON-INFRINGEMENT, MERCHANTABILITY, or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. You are solely responsible for determining the appropriateness of using the Artifact, and assume any risks associated with Your exercise of permissions under this License.

9. Limitation of Liability. In no event and under no legal theory, whether in tort (including negligence), contract, or otherwise, unless required by applicable law (such as deliberate and grossly negligent acts) or agreed to in writing, shall any Contributor be liable to You for damages, including any direct, indirect, special, incidental, or consequential damages of any character arising as a result of this License or out of the use or inability to use the Artifact (including but not limited to damages for loss of goodwill, work stoppage, computer failure or malfunction, or any and all other commercial damages or losses), even if such Contributor has been advised of the possibility of such damages.

10. If any provision of this License is held to be invalid, illegal or unenforceable, the remaining provisions shall be unaffected thereby and remain valid as if such provision had not been set forth herein.

11. Term and Termination. The term of this License will commence upon the earlier of (a) Your acceptance of this License or (b) accessing the Artifact; and will continue in full force and effect until terminated in accordance with the terms and conditions herein. Licensor may terminate this License if You are in breach of any term or condition of this Agreement. Upon termination of this Agreement, You shall delete and cease use of the Artifact. Section 9 shall survive the termination of this License.

END OF TERMS AND CONDITIONS

Attachment A

Use Restrictions

You agree not to use the Artifact or its Derivatives in any of the following ways:

1. Discrimination

   a. To discriminate or exploit individuals or groups based on legally protected characteristics and/or vulnerabilities.

   b. For purposes of administration of justice, law enforcement, immigration, or asylum processes, such as predicting that a natural person will commit a crime or the likelihood thereof.

   c. To engage in, promote, incite, or facilitate discrimination or other unlawful or harmful conduct in the provision of employment, employment benefits, credit, housing, or other essential goods and services.

2. Military

   a. For weaponry or warfare.

3. Legal

   a. To engage or enable fully automated decision-making that adversely impacts a natural person’s legal rights without expressly and intelligibly disclosing the impact to such natural person and providing an appeal process.

   b. To engage or enable fully automated decision-making that creates, modifies or terminates a binding, enforceable obligation between entities; whether these include natural persons or not.

   c. In any way that violates any applicable national, federal, state, local or international law or regulation.

4. Disinformation

   a. To create, present or disseminate verifiably false or misleading information for economic gain or to intentionally deceive the public, including creating false impersonations of natural persons.

   b. To synthesize or modify a natural person’s appearance, voice, or other individual characteristics, unless prior informed consent of said natural person is obtained.

   c. To autonomously interact with a natural person, in text or audio format, unless disclosure and consent is given prior to interaction that the system engaging in the interaction is not a natural person.

   d. To defame or harm a natural person’s reputation, such as by generating, creating, promoting, or spreading defamatory content (statements, images, or other content).

   e. To generate or disseminate information (including – but not limited to – images, code, posts, articles), and place the information in any public context without expressly and intelligibly disclaiming that the information and/or content is machine generated.

5. Privacy

   a. To utilize personal information to infer additional personal information about a natural person, including but not limited to legally protected characteristics, vulnerabilities or categories; unless informed consent from the data subject to collect said inferred personal information for a stated purpose and defined duration is received.

   b. To generate or disseminate personal identifiable information that can be used to harm an individual or to invade the personal privacy of an individual.

   c. To engage in, promote, incite, or facilitate the harassment, abuse, threatening, or bullying of individuals or groups of individuals.

6. Health

   a. To provide medical advice or make clinical decisions without necessary (external) accreditation of the system; unless the use is (i) in an internal research context with independent and accountable oversight and/or (ii) with medical professional oversight that is accompanied by any related compulsory certification and/or safety/quality standard for the implementation of the technology.

   b. To provide medical advice and medical results interpretation without external, human validation of such advice or interpretation.

   c. In connection with any activities that present a risk of death or bodily harm to individuals, including self-harm or harm to others, or in connection with regulated or controlled substances.

   d. In connection with activities that present a risk of death or bodily harm to individuals, including inciting or promoting violence, abuse, or any infliction of bodily harm to an individual or group of individuals.

7. Malware

   a. To generate and/or disseminate malware (including – but not limited to – ransomware) or any other content to be used for the purpose of Harming electronic systems.

8. General

   a. To defame, disparage or otherwise harass others.

   b. To Intentionally deceive or mislead others, including failing to appropriately disclose to end users any known dangers of your system.

9. Research

   a. In connection with any academic dishonesty, including submitting any informational content or output of a Model as Your own work in any academic setting.

10. Other restrictions

   a. The Artifact may not be used to extract or obtain personal data.

   b. Any Model trained on the Artifact shall have adequate limitations to ensure that personal information from the Artifact may not be provided as an Output.
